app/src/main/res/raw/tides.md, before:

Do not rely on this tool's estimates and only trust official tide tables.

## How to add a tide table?
Before hiking in a coastal area, consult an official tide table for times. Once you have the times and water heights, you can enter them into Trail Sense's Tide tool. Follow these steps to import a tide table:
1. Open the Tide tool from the Tools tab
2. Click the tides button in the top right to open the tide list
3. Click the add button in the bottom right to create a new tide table
4. Add each tide to the table that you care about, clicking the H or L to change between high and low tide
5. Optionally add a name and location for the tide
6. Click the done button in the bottom right, and select the tide from the list

For the best accuracy, add all tides for each day you care about. Trail Sense will indicate if a tide was entered vs estimated when viewed on the tide chart.

## How to create a tide without an official table?
Trail Sense can be used to estimate when the next tide will be at a given location if you do not have access to a tide table. This estimate may be inaccurate by a couple of hours, so it is always preferable to consult an officially published tide table when possible. If you know the tide is currently high or low, you can create a tide table with a single entry and Trail Sense will estimate when the tidal cycle. This should only be used for short term predictions, as it will get less accurate the further away from the reference tide. 

## Where to find official tide tables?
You can typically find a tide table by searching the Internet for tides in your location. A list of sources may be provided here in the future.

Commit message:

Add links to online tide tables
Closes #549

app/src/main/res/raw/tides.md, after:

Do not rely on this tool's estimates and only trust official tide tables.

## How to add a tide table?
Before hiking in a coastal area, consult an official tide table for times. Once you have the times and water heights, you can enter them into Trail Sense's Tide tool. Follow these steps to import a tide table:
1. Open the Tide tool from the Tools tab
2. Click the tides button in the top right to open the tide list
3. Click the add button in the bottom right to create a new tide table
4. Add each tide to the table that you care about, clicking the H or L to change between high and low tide
5. Optionally add a name and location for the tide
6. Click the done button in the bottom right, and select the tide from the list

For the best accuracy, add all tides for each day you care about. Trail Sense will indicate if a tide was entered vs estimated when viewed on the tide chart.

## How to create a tide without an official table?
Trail Sense can be used to estimate when the next tide will be at a given location if you do not have access to a tide table. This estimate may be inaccurate by a couple of hours, so it is always preferable to consult an officially published tide table when possible. If you know the tide is currently high or low, you can create a tide table with a single entry and Trail Sense will estimate when the tidal cycle. This should only be used for short term predictions, as it will get less accurate the further away from the reference tide. 

## Where to find official tide tables?
You can typically find a tide table by searching the Internet for tides in your location. Below are a variety of external sites which offer tide tables.

### Worldwide
- [tides4fishing](https://tides4fishing.com/)
- [tide-forcast.com](https://www.tide-forecast.com/)
- [SHOM](https://maree.shom.fr/)

### Germany
- [BSH](https://www.bsh.de/DE/DATEN/Vorhersagen/Gezeiten/gezeiten_node.html)

### Netherlands
- [Rijkswaterstaat](https://www.rijkswaterstaat.nl/water/waterdata-en-waterberichtgeving/waterdata/getij)

### UK
- [UK Hydrographic Office: EasyTide](https://easytide.admiralty.co.uk/)

### UK + Ireland
- [NTSLF Tides](https://ntslf.org/tides/predictions)

### USA
- [NOAA Tides & Currents](https://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/tide_predictions.html)
- [Tides.net](https://tides.net/)
